[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Would
you be surprised to know
that 1/3 of the population
in the United States
is in a pre-diabetic condition?
And did you know
that high blood sugar
is implicated in the onset of
dementia and Alzheimer's, heart
disease, even premature
wrinkling of the skin?
Dr. John Douillard
is an evangelist
for bringing down the
public's blood sugar levels
and establishing a healthy
standard of living that
eliminates the associated
problems of high blood sugar.
He's with us today to give us
some straight facts on what
we can do to help ourselves.
And we all know about diabetes.
We know people who have it.
They have to stick themselves.
They can go into a coma
if it goes too far.
But most people don't know.
You're talking, what, 90
million, 100 million people?
>>JOHN DOUILLARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Another
stat, 90% of them
don't even know
they have it, right?
>>DOUILLARD: That's right.
That's 90 million people are
walking around today as adults
with pre-diabetes and they
don't know they have it.
And the problem is that when
you go for your annual checkup,
the doctor screens you
for your blood sugar.
And the normal range
for blood sugar
is about 75 to 100
milligrams per deciliter
on your blood test.
So if you're over 100,
you're a pre-diabetic.
If you're over 126,
you're a type 2 diabetic.
Now, there are
labs out there that
are still not screening you at
all until you're 118 or 110.
And studies have shown that
the damage of diabetes--
and we'll talk
about what that is--
that doesn't start just at 100.
There was one study that
showed, if your numbers are just
over 85, you're at a 40%
increased risk of dying
of a heart attack or stroke.
So there's a bunch of people
that between 85 and 100.
Now, 1/3 of the American
population is over 100.
>>REGINA: Over 100.
So what percentage of the
population is at 85 to 100?
>>DOUILLARD: They did a study
with 43,000 non-diabetic men,
and 80% of them were over 85.
>>REGINA: So most of us are
really sitting on the edge?
>>DOUILLARD: Who's left, really?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DOUILLARD: And this
is really an epidemic.
The experts believe the
next 10 years, everybody,
all American adults
will be pre-diabetic,
but there's issues
taking place right now.
>>REGINA: I remember
an interview
I did about seven
years ago, and that
was the prognosis that
most of the population
was going to be pre-diabetic
and a much higher percentage
than now slipping into a state
of full-on type 1 diabetes.
>>DOUILLARD: That's
actually right.
>>REGINA: So now,
first of all, I
would think that the symptoms
would be fairly obvious,
but you're saying they're not.
What are the symptoms?
>>DOUILLARD: They
are and they are not.
When this study came out
two years ago from the CDC,
I sourced these
hospital-approved blood
sugar monitors so that I can
give them to my patients,
they could take it home, and
they can check their own blood
sugar.
And these are very
healthy people generally,
and their blood sugars
were 110, 120, 130.
A lot of them full-blown type 2
diabetics and they had no idea.
So a lot of the symptoms
of diabetes are insidious,
and what happens
is on the inside.
The number one thing, when
that blood sugar starts
to rise after a dessert
or after a Coca-Cola, when
those numbers start to rise
in your blood a little bit,
the first thing that happens
is the muscles, which
are the big gas
guzzlers for your sugar,
they just go, I can't
take any more sugar.
I don't even want
to think about it.
So then it stays in your blood.
The first thing it does
is converts directly
into fat, belly fat,
hip fat, arm fat.
That's number one.
Number two, it converts directly
into LDL cholesterol, which
is damaging for your arteries.
And number three,
the worst of all,
is what's called glycation.
The sugar in your blood attaches
to proteins in your blood
and clumps your blood.
It's particularly fond of
two very important proteins,
collagen and elastin,
which makes our skin look
nice and youthful.
But it doesn't only make us
look old and aged and wrinkled
on the outside, but it's the
skin on the inside that's
most important.
When your arteries
start to wrinkle
and your intestinal mucosa
and your intestinal tract
starts to wrinkle,
your respiratory tract
starts to wrinkle, we've
got some severe problems.
And what happens, when that
glycation begins to happen,
it's the number one cause
of cardiovascular disease.
It damages your arteries.
So the number one killer in
America today is heart disease.
The number one cause
of heart disease
is this insidious blood
sugar pre-diabetic impact.
>>REGINA: See, now,
that's not something
you hear about that often.
We only hear about cholesterol
and some other obvious things
the medical industry
passes on to us.
>>DOUILLARD: And this is
the cause of that, really.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I remember years ago
doing an interview
with Udo Erasmus who wrote
the book "Fats That Heal,
Fats That Kill."
>>DOUILLARD: Fantastic book.
>>REGINA: Fantastic.
And Udo was explaining to
me that it was not the fat
that we eat in our
diet, it was the sugars
and the simple carbohydrates
we eat in our diet that
were killing us.
Now, that was completely
counter to everything
going on if you look at the
food pyramid, cut out the fats,
cut out the fats.
Well, a lot of that
thinking is changing,
and let's talk about the whole
cycle of simple carbohydrates
versus, we'll just start
with, versus fats and proteins
and what it's doing
to our insulin levels.
>>DOUILLARD: Well, the
simple carbohydrates
are the refined sugars and the
white table sugar, for example.
We think white table sugar is
the worst thing in the world.
Well, what's interesting is the
glycemic index of white table
sugar is about a 59.
This is how quickly the
sugar gets into your blood.
The glycemic index of
organic whole wheat bread
that you buy from the grocery
store that will actually
sit on your counter for
three weeks or a month
without going bad, basically
put bakers out of business--
>>REGINA: Because it's
not real food anymore.
>>DOUILLARD: Remember, bakers
used to make bread every day?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: Well,
they don't have
to do that anymore
because they have
this one-month-long
lasting bread.
Well, the glycemic index of
whole wheat organic bread
in the grocery
story is about a 75.
>>REGINA: Higher than
a tablespoon of sugar?
>>DOUILLARD: You're better
off having white table sugar
because it goes in that fast.
The glycemic index of
a sprouted grain bread,
the one you would get in the
refrigerated section that
literally goes bad in two
days on the counter, is a 39.
So it's not just the sugars,
it's the hidden sugars,
and it's the processed
nature of our foods
that made the glycemic
index of these foods
so fast that they
explode into your blood,
and our body just don't
know what to do with it.
>>REGINA: One of
the first things
I think that people do
feel, but they may not
know what to put it
down to, is this sense
of a lack of focus
mentally, for example.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And it seems for
me, if I'm eating poorly,
my brain seems to recognize
it almost instantly.
And it's funny, because it's not
necessarily some of the things
you would think it would be.
>>DOUILLARD: Well, there's
some really good research
that Alzheimer's is sometimes
called diabetes of the brain.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DOUILLARD: And the same enzyme
that we have that actually
takes the plaque
out of the brain
to protect us from Alzheimer's
is the exact same enzyme
that takes the sugar out
of the blood in the brain.
So if your enzyme
is now so constantly
overwhelmed with
taking the sugar out
of the blood to
protect the brain,
it's going to leave the plaque.
And it's one of the leading
causes of Alzheimer's, at least
that's one of the leading
theories with regard
to Alzheimer's today is actually
that we have too much sugar
in the blood.
So if the getting wrinkled
doesn't it scare you
or getting heart disease
doesn't scare you--
>>REGINA: Losing
your mind should.
>>DOUILLARD: --that
should definitely get you.
>>REGINA: But we also notice
a drop in our overall energy
level, for example, if
we're riding that high.
And would you say that
everybody's tolerance
is wired differently that way?
I mean, some people can eat what
appears to be very abusively
and not seem to feel anything.
What's up with that?
>>DOUILLARD: Well, everybody
has a different constitution,
and I think we have
this roller coaster
ride that begins to
brew, particularly
in our American culture.
And a lot of people
still eat this way
where they have a cup
of coffee in the morning
and they get off, and they
race to work, and bam!
>>REGINA: And a bagel.
>>DOUILLARD: And a bagel.
And then they go up, and
that's all just pure sugar.
The bagel sugar is
a 77 glycemic index.
The coffee just injects you.
Then around 10
o'clock it crashes
and you need another cup of
coffee to get you back up.
Then you start crashing.
And you've been
gaining some weight
so you don't want
to eat a big lunch.
You don't want to
have a big launch
so you have a salad in front
of your computer with a Coke
or a Diet Coke, and of course,
that just injects your sugar up
even more.
Then at 3 o'clock
in the afternoon,
you're crashing and
burning, so they
start passing dark chocolate
around, and that gets you up
and you feel a little
better, and the blood sugar
starts to come up again.
Then you have to drive
home, and your blood sugar
is now crashing because
it's all up and down.
Sugar is a short-lived
energy supply.
And then at 4:00 you
have to drive home,
so you have to hit Starbucks
to get some energy to get home.
And you've been going
like this all day long.
The body is so stressed out
that it needs a glass of wine
to settle itself down.
And when the highs and
lows, and the body's
constantly unable to
stabilize its own blood sugar,
the body's response to
that emergency response
is to store fat and
create more sugar,
and that's what we have done.
And the food industry
has served us well.
It's just provided quicker,
faster versions of food
so we eat that constantly.
>>REGINA: And I've
always attended,
throughout my lifetime,
I think I learned
the entire caloric table
by the time I was 15
because I did not want to
become overweight in life.
And so I was looking at it
as a pure caloric burner.
That's not true.
I mean, you can take 1,200,
1,500, 2,000 calories,
and they're quantitatively
very different
in terms of how you're going
to store fat on the body.
>>DOUILLARD: It's sort of
how quickly those calories
get into your bloodstream.
And if they get
in really quickly
and that surges your blood, your
body's going to go, [GASPS],,
this is an emergency.
I've got to get this
sugar out of my blood
and get it out quick.
So depending on
how you're wired,
it will convert it to fat or to
cholesterol or it will glycate,
or it will actually affect
your brain chemistry.
>>REGINA: More so than the
actual number of calories
that your body's taking in.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah, absolutely.
And a lot of us have
really sluggish--
see, the wear and tear
of the blood sugars
going high and low, it
creates a major impact
on your ability to digest
food, so you don't eliminate
as well as you once did.
You don't digest hard-to-digest
foods as well as you once did.
I have so many patients
now, in Boulder, Colorado,
if you are found eating
gluten, they give you a ticket.
It's like illegal to eat gluten
in Boulder now because it's
become such a
terrible taboo food,
and it's really not
the gluten that's bad.
When they were 18-year-old,
people could eat the gluten.
But now, as we get older, we
lose the digestive strength,
and now we don't digest
hard-to-digest foods,
so we don't eat them.
We take them out of our
diet and we feel better.
But the problem is that the
toxins in our environment
are also hard to digest.
So you can take the
hard-to-digest foods out
of your diet, but you
can't take the toxins.
And your digestive
system is also
your detoxification system.
So we can navigate
around the food,
but the environmental
toxins we have to process.
And one of those
signposts of being
a good detoxifier in a toxic
world that's so critical
is being a good digester.
And if you've been
going down the road,
well, I can't eat wheat, I can't
eat dairy, I can't eat greasy,
fried food-- and
nobody's saying you
need to eat any of
those foods, but you
should be able to as a
measure of your ability
to be a good digester and
therefore a good detoxifier.
And I really believe
that all of us
can have the digestive
system of an 18-year-old.
And we don't have to, as we
age, become lousy digesters.
I just don't buy into that, and
I treat that with my patients
on a regular basis, and I write
about that in my newsletters
on a regular basis.
>>REGINA: That's a great
newsletter, by the way.
>>DOUILLARD: So many doctors
and naturopaths are so about,
you're getting old.
Your digestive days are over.
You need enzymes.
You need all these probiotics.
And not to say that
they are not useful,
but when we become dependent
on these pills or powders
to digest, I think
it's a red flag.
>>REGINA: OK.
Well, a few ways to go here.
Now, one of them, you were
talking about Boulder.
We're talking about
issuing citations
for gluten and for body fat.
>>DOUILLARD: Yes.
>>REGINA: I think this has to be
the lowest body fat per capita
of any place, certainly in the
Western world, in the developed
nations, is Boulder.
And yet, at the
same time, what I'm
hearing from some of the
people and practitioners
and a doctor such as yourself,
we haven't talked about it,
is that still, you're finding
high levels of blood sugar
in a lot of the clients,
even though they're
down to almost zero body fat.
>>DOUILLARD: Well,
they eat foods
that they think are healthy.
I had one patient
that recently came in,
and her blood sugars were high,
higher than they should be.
And we've looked at
her diet, and I said,
do you eat dried fruit?
And she goes, yes,
I love dried fruit.
It's very healthy for you.
And so, for example, if you
take a mango, a regular mango,
it's about 13 grams of sugar
off the vine, off the tree.
If you take that and dry it and
take the same amount of mango,
it's 76 grams of sugar.
From 13 to 76.
>>REGINA: Sure,
it's concentrated.
>>DOUILLARD: So that's what
happens when we concentrate
our foods with dried fruit.
Or you know, I'm juicing, and I
juice my apples and my carrots
and my beats every morning.
Well, apples and
carrots and beets
are high starchy foods
and full of sugar.
And when you juice them,
you extract the sugar,
and now you're ingesting--
many times, people,
that's all they have for
breakfast is this explosion
into their bloodstream.
Now, they are healthy sugars
from the point of view
of they're natural,
but it's still sugar.
Agave is still sugar.
Honey.
I have bees.
I love honey, but
it's still sugar.
And just because we are moving
to these natural sweets,
it doesn't matter.
Pomegranate juice, 8 ounces of
pomegranate, 30 grams of sugar.
That's 10 teaspoons of white
table sugar out of the jar.
>>REGINA: That's shocking.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
And we think pomegranate
juice is good for your heart
and many things,
but we were supposed
to chew that pomegranate seed.
When we were born or--
>>REGINA: And then you would've
had the fiber and everything
with it.
>>DOUILLARD: That's right.
And it comes in slower.
But we're so fast-paced
and processing everything.
We don't have to chew
our food anymore, really.
These days, chewing is--
>>REGINA: Optional?
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah, optional.
It's labor intensive.
It takes so long.
>>REGINA: It takes too long.
>>DOUILLARD: I just want to
drink my breakfast and go,
and that's a big problem.
>>REGINA: Now you
brought up juicing,
and I don't think
I'd be able to--
I wouldn't be able to drive to
work if I juiced in the morning
because it spikes the
blood sugar so high,
I can't even think
straight juicing.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: And I know
a lot of other people,
it's the same way,
but this is really
one of the backbones
to a raw diet,
for example, is
a lot of juicing.
Doesn't have to be, but it is.
>>DOUILLARD: Backbones
to a healthy diet.
People think it's
really healthy.
>>REGINA: That's right.
And now let's get into a
little bit of the raw factor
because I want to start
distinguishing in these treats
that we like to
indulge in in life.
So you're now eating raw
or predominantly raw,
and one of our interviewees,
who is also someone I know well,
is a queen of raw desserts.
And so you grind
up your almonds,
and your whatever other nuts--
I think she uses pine nuts and
walnuts-- in with some dates,
and make a little paste,
and there's your crust.
Now that's dominantly
fats and protein.
The ratio of dates is
actually still pretty small.
Then you put in
your coconut milk
that's been all
whipped up with, maybe,
just a small amount of
maple syrup, for example,
and your chia
seeds and all that.
So now we have a lot of fat,
we have some proteins going on
and some sugars.
Would that be
considered, if you're
going to treat yourself,
a healthy spectrum or not
necessarily?
>>DOUILLARD: The
glycemic load is what
you eat with the whole meal.
If you have a balanced
meal, and then you
have that on top of it, it's
generally going to be OK.
But most people, nowadays,
in the name of good health,
we don't eat balanced meals.
A lot of people think a salad
is a good, healthy meal.
Now my mom would never
just serve me a salad,
and that was it.
OK, here, honey,
here's your lunch.
It's a salad.
>>REGINA: Yeah, right.
>>DOUILLARD: That never
would've happened.
Never would they give you
a glass of juice and say,
that's breakfast, on your way.
It was always a protein,
a starch, and a vegetable.
And we don't do that any longer.
And when you have
blood sugar issues,
the key, number one key, is
to stabilize your blood sugar
with balanced meals.
Now in the beginning, eating a
little bit less carbohydrates
and starches makes good sense.
But if you do that excessively--
in the whole no-carb world that
we live in--
that carbs have been deemed
so bad for us, from Atkins--
>>REGINA: But the
brain needs those.
Just with serotonin
production, don't we need it?
>>DOUILLARD: The
brain needs sugar.
They're long-lasting sugars.
They're very important.
And see, if you
don't have any carbs,
your body's going to get
its energy from fat, right?
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>DOUILLARD: And we lose weight,
and everybody feels great.
That was the Atkins model.
>>REGINA: Happy.
Mm-hm.
>>DOUILLARD: The
problem with that
is that when you go
into fat metabolism,
the body creates a lot of
ketones, which is actually
a chemical that your body has
to process through the kidneys.
And long-term, low carbohydrate,
high protein, high fat diets
can actually damage
your kidneys.
In the end, the
last thing you want
to do in the name of good health
is create another problem.
And that's what we do when
we go into these extreme ways
of eating.
>>REGINA: Wasn't that the case
with some of the Atkins diet?
>>DOUILLARD: That's
exactly what happened.
>>REGINA: People had
a lot of that problem.
Yeah.
Gall bladder.
>>DOUILLARD: Yep.
One of the main reasons
why it fell out of favor
was because there was a lot
of reports of kidney problems,
and that scares people, and
it should, and rightfully so.
So it's about balance.
>>REGINA: It all comes
back to that, doesn't it?
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
>>REGINA: But we
are out of balance.
>>DOUILLARD: We
>>REGINA: Because we're
following every fad.
If we tend to follow whatever
the latest gurus, health
guru, food diet
guru's book is, we
are going to be out of balance
for the most part, right?
>>DOUILLARD: Because
these diets tend to just--
they last for about five years.
Years ago, when we
had the Pritikin diet,
Pritikin basically said, you
can eat 80% carbohydrates,
and lose weight, feel
good, and everything.
>>REGINA: Yeah, no fats.
>>DOUILLARD: So then,
all of a sudden,
everybody's blood sugar
started going crazy
because they're eating
lots of sugars--
80% carbohydrates.
>>REGINA: Per capita,
didn't we go up
something like 12% over
that decade where that was
at the top of the food pyramid?
>>DOUILLARD: Right, exactly.
And it wasn't
really his message.
His message was
more balanced food.
But we hear 80% carbs, and the
food industry hears 80% carbs,
it becomes short-chain,
quick, fast-moving carbs
injected into blood sugar.
And then we have hypoglycemia.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DOUILLARD: And
then the hypoglycemia
created stress, which caused
cholesterol levels to rise
and shoot up like crazy.
And then we blamed
it on animal fats.
So then margarine and all these
crazy fad diets came into play.
And then we started
saying, hey, you know what?
The blood sugar's wacky, this
is a real serious problem,
so we should eat
six meals a day.
Now America started grazing.
Every two to three hours, we're
eating little, tiny meals.
Now let me ask you something.
If you want your
body to burn fat,
it makes good sense
to give it a reason.
So if you have breakfast, snack,
lunch, snack, supper, snack,
when does your
body burn its fat?
Compared to if you
have breakfast--
>>REGINA: When you're sleeping?
>>DOUILLARD: Well--
>>REGINA: That's about it?
No?
>>DOUILLARD: That's
the number one
problem is that when people are
used to having meals every two
to three hours, then
they go to bed and go,
now we're going to sleep
for eight or nine hours,
the body goes, what?
I'm used to being
fed every two hours.
I need some food.
So they wake up hungry.
The second cause of
insomnia in America
is blood sugar instability.
>>REGINA: That's fascinating.
I don't think most
people know that.
>>DOUILLARD: No.
So we have to give
the body a reason
to be a good fat burner,
and not just to lose weight.
Fat is calm fuel.
It's stable fuel.
It's not emergency fuel.
It's sleep-through-the-night
fuel.
It's your detoxifying fuel.
It neutralizes the
acidity in your body
from all the stress that
makes your body toxic
and degenerative.
So if you want your body
to burn fat-- and we do,
for lots of reasons--
you have to give it a reason.
Breakfast, nothing till lunch.
In between breakfast
and lunch, you burn fat.
If you have a carrot
between breakfast and lunch,
you're going to burn the carrot.
And that's the healthy meal.
Carrots are good for you.
>>REGINA: But you're not
going to burn the fat.
>>DOUILLARD: Not that meal.
From lunch to supper,
I have an apple.
Well, an apple's
good for you, but I
didn't burn my fat that day.
And from supper all the way
to breakfast, we burn fat.
Now when I was a kid,
we had supper at 5:30.
6 o'clock, kitchen was closed.
Went out, kicked the
can, come back, play,
wake up at 7 o'clock,
and have breakfast.
That was 13 hours of our
day fasting, no food.
That would be like social
services knocking on your door
and say, excuse me, Mrs.
Johnson, you're fasting.
You're starving your children.
You can't be doing that.
You gotta feed your
kids every three hours.
It's America.
Come on.
Gotta feed them.
>>REGINA: No, that's
how we were raised.
But you didn't see
obese kids either.
>>DOUILLARD: No, you didn't.
>>REGINA: None of our
friends had obesity.
I usually say, you're
out playing after dinner.
>>DOUILLARD: Attention deficit,
asthma, all these issues,
we just didn't see it.
So the ability to
be good fat burners
is the ability to make
energy last and be stable,
and that creates a stable mood.
And that's something we
don't have in this country
either is stable mood.
Everybody's gone wacky,
and depressed, and anxious.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DOUILLARD: Can't
handle stress any longer.
It's a big deal.
>>REGINA: Now you're on a
drug to manage your moods.
>>DOUILLARD: Exactly.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: And I noticed that a
lot of people that are trying
to burn the fat, have
gone away from the carbs--
we've seen a lot of this--
but there seems to
be these periods
of really grumpy dispositions,
agitation, irritation.
And so obviously, that's
not working for them.
If you're having that, That's
not a normal manifestation.
If you're having a balanced
diet, that wouldn't be, right?
>>DOUILLARD: Low-carb diets
are a form of starvation.
And we burn fat because in the
old days, hunter-gatherers,
it was feast or famine.
And we were very
used to starving
and probably were a
little on the grumpy
side during that
starvation time.
>>REGINA: Probably.
>>DOUILLARD: So
that explains that.
But what we really
have to try to take
the stress, the emergency,
out of people's lives.
People finish their day
exhausted and wasted.
Their life has
become a struggle.
And when you start
eating properly,
you finish your day with the
same energy as you started.
It's a sign post
of balanced diet.
If you need meal, snack,
meal, snack, meal,
snack, throughout the
day, I can guarantee you
that your blood
sugar's unstable.
It's one of the first lifestyle
measures that you can take.
Can you go from breakfast to
lunch, from lunch to supper,
from supper to bed, with
no snacks and be satisfied?
If you can, blood
sugar's probably OK.
If you need that
snack, it's a red flag.
>>REGINA: And at
the same time, we're
no longer accustomed
to becoming hungry.
We don't like the
feeling of hunger.
>>DOUILLARD: That's right.
>>REGINA: And so as soon as
you feel your stomach growl
a little bit, just that first
pang of hunger, in the West--
well, in America, anyway--
we tend to throw something
at it right away.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Now we've conditioned
ourselves to experience hunger
as a negative.
>>DOUILLARD: You bring
up a point there,
because the sugars
in our foods provide
a certain sense of
satiety, not only
for the tummy and the
body, but for the brain.
And that instant surge
of sugar into the brain
activates a dopamine receptor,
dopamine in the brain.
And dopamine is the "I gotta
have it right now" hormone.
So the brain has been
triggered and used
to from that first ice
cream as a 3-year-old
to "I gotta have it
right now" hormone.
So we have become--
it's very interesting,
and I've written
about this in my
newsletters-- we've
become little junkies,
little drug addicts,
addicted to a host of dopamine
activators, like shopping.
When you go shopping,
your dopamine level
starts to rise, and rise,
and then it goes higher.
And as you're browsing,
it's getting higher.
But as soon as you
swipe that card,
the dopamine levels crash.
>>REGINA: And that
happens to people.
I see this with
women all the time.
They buy this stuff, and then--
it's called shopping
bulimia, right?
And then they get home.
They're feeling down.
It didn't make them
happy after all.
Take the stuff back, right?
>>DOUILLARD: Oh,
that's a good idea.
Or they go to Mrs.
Fields Cookies,
or they go to Cinnabon,
which is in the mall too.
And after they've swiped the
credit, they go, I'm hungry.
>>REGINA: OK, so we're picking
on women here, but what
about spectator sports and men?
>>DOUILLARD: Well,
men do the same thing.
Men are addicted to sitting
home, watching the football
game.
>>REGINA: Right, exactly.
>>DOUILLARD: Men are
addicted to work.
All of us can be
addicted to any of it.
But what I think
is a good strategy
is to identify where
are your addictions?
And sugar tends to
drive it for us.
People see the
logo of Starbucks,
and their dopamine
levels start to rise.
You're a complete, insane drug
addict at that point in time.
You're driving in
there, and you're
ordering that Starbucks
whether you like it or not,
because your brain got
a look at that logo
and made that connection,
and we're going.
And that's how
addicted we've become,
and we have no idea
it's happening.
>>REGINA: So you're really
stuck in a dopamine cycle.
>>DOUILLARD: That's right.
>>REGINA: But in reality,
the feel-good chemical
is serotonin.
Where does serotonin
come into this?
It comes in at some
point when, as you say,
you're eating your Cinnabon and
washing it down with a latte.
>>DOUILLARD: Well, if you really
want to stretch it further,
the real feel-good
chemical is oxytocin.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DOUILLARD: Which is the one
that you get when you give,
and you care for, and you love,
and you take care of others.
So that's really the hormone.
>>REGINA: That's
the authentic one.
>>DOUILLARD: It's
the hugging hormone.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DOUILLARD: So when
you hug someone,
you actually produce more
oxytocin, and you give love.
And that's the one thing--
>>REGINA: So we're really
looking for oxytocin
when we're splurging to feel
the serotonin spike, right?
>>DOUILLARD: Looking for
love in all the wrong places.
Exactly.
Well, if I can get
something, it'll fill me up.
And we all know that
that's not true.
But we rarely have the time.
I'm too busy to help, or
serve, or care, or actually
love your husband, or your
wife, or your partner,
to really give yourself
fully to that relationship.
Many of us don't do that
because we're just too busy
and lots of reasons
why, so we just
live our separate,
parallel, coexisting lives,
and we never give ourselves
fully to that relationship.
And that commitment,
and the willingness
to open the very delicate
petals of your flower
and give yourself fully to
someone that you know you love,
but because my mind
has convinced me to--
>>REGINA: You're just
too spent all the time,
and you just breeze
right past them.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
But those are the things
we can do every day,
and it'll fill us up
on a deeper level.
And then, of course, if you
have balanced meals and balanced
diet, you get off the
sugar roller coaster.
And when you're off
that sugar roller
coaster, all of a
sudden, you're like, wow,
I don't need anything.
I don't need that Starbucks.
I don't need that
injection to feel good.
I'm feeling pretty
good just being myself
for the first time.
And that's a whole new
world for a lot of folks.
>>REGINA: But you have to start
somewhere when you do that.
And a little later
in the program,
we're going to talk about
some of the things that's
important to do.
But one of the things
we'll get to also
is you understand Ayurveda.
And I wanted to talk to you
about where does blood sugar
play into this typology.
>>DOUILLARD: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And so I would love to
have you explain that in a bit.
But first of all, I want
to go back to a moment
ago when you were talking
about these chemicals.
So what is an appropriate
spectrum of dopamine,
serotonin, oxytocin?
What would a normal
lifestyle look like to you?
Because I think people
are just sick of dieting.
They're tired of things that
take time and take them out
of community with other people
because they don't do gluten,
they only eat raw, vegetarian,
which I did for 20 years.
>>DOUILLARD: It's
really quite simple.
Go back to basics.
Basics are three, good,
balanced meals per day.
If we were living off the farm,
we would eat different foods
from season to season.
One of my books is called
"The 3-Season Diet,"
is understanding that in
the winter, we harvest more
proteins and fats.
In the spring,
more leafy greens.
In the summer, more
high-energy carbohydrates
to get through the long days
and short nights of summer.
So the idea is that every
season, the diet shifts.
So as we begin to start having
meals as opposed to snacks,
and we start to have
fat burning in between,
and we start burning the calm
fuel and actually feel calm,
we begin to naturally
crave what's in-season.
We begin to reconnect
with those natural cycles.
And when you're going
downstream with the current,
living in harmony with
nature, which is really
what Ayurveda is about, you feel
like life is not a struggle.
It's not such a strain.
You're not exhausted
at the end of your day.
So there's many strategies
to begin to re-entrain
with the cycles of nature.
Like the birds, they fly south.
Whales migrate.
Their survival depends on them
being in connection and harmony
with those cycles.
We have just thrown
out the window.
We have no connection to that.
>>REGINA: We defy all cycles.
>>DOUILLARD: And it's
not that far away though.
Just a few little shifts
in your lifestyle,
and you're right back in there.
>>REGINA: Just a
few little shifts.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah,
little shifts.
Not a lot.
It doesn't take a
lot, but we need
to do something because the
program we're on right now
is unsustainable.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And for some reason,
there seems to be--
I don't know, this major
mental stumbling block
to just going back to
harmony and balance.
Because even if you're
looking at it as someone who's
dedicated to their health,
they're doing their yoga,
they're running 6 miles a day
or whatever they're doing,
they're reading
through "delicious"
and all the free food
supplement magazines
that are in the grocery store,
even just looking at the ads
there, any one of those things
will throw you out of balance,
and become toxic
in and of itself.
So we have to really unplug
from the larger message,
it sounds like, the
predominant message.
And we're going to
talk about Ayurveda
and going back into
balance when we come back.
So we'll just take a brief break
here, and we'll be right back.
We are back, and we're
going to talk qualitatively
about some of the sugars that
we introduce into our lives,
in our tea and other
drinks, before we
get into the big, overarching
subjects of balance, harmony,
Ayurveda, and some
other subjects.
So let's go back for a moment.
We talked about hidden sugars,
such as in dried fruits
and such.
But people who are
listening and thinking,
oh, I always have a shot
of vanilla in my latte--
OK, that's pure sugar.
But let's talk about
agave, as you said--
agave, honey, pure
white table sugar.
Coconut sugar--
that's one that's
come up recently as having
maybe a lower glycemic index.
Is that true?
>>DOUILLARD: All those sugars,
they all have a glycemic index,
and they all hit your
bloodstream pretty quickly.
A Starbucks venti green iced
tea is 51 grams of sugar.
That's about almost 20
teaspoons of white table sugar.
That's a lot.
>>REGINA: That's
shocking, really.
>>DOUILLARD: So we were thinking
you're drinking a green tea,
it's good for me.
So they're so hidden,
and they're so insidious.
But agave has a very
high glycemic index.
It's got a lot of fructose.
Fructose, while it doesn't
seem to impact your blood sugar
glycemic index as well, which is
why we think it's good for you,
it's very harsh on the liver,
and it's very difficult
to digest.
>>REGINA: OK.
Oh, interesting.
>>DOUILLARD: And what most
people don't realize is that
the blood sugar is
regulated by three things--
the efficiency of
your intestinal villi,
your pancreas, we all
know, and your liver.
And your liver might be the
most important one of all.
So when we hit it
with lots and lots
of sugars or lots of fructose,
then that overwhelms the liver.
Sugars are generally--
or fructose, for example,
is something that is
most commonly harvested
at the end of the summer.
The bears in the
fall are gorging
on apples and all the fruits
because it converts straight
into fat, so it insulates them.
And that's why nature gave
it to us, just to really help
to insulate and gain that fat.
So that's exactly
what fructose does.
It helps the body store fat.
It's not processed
very easily by liver.
It converts right into
fat as an insulator.
Once a year, not a bad deal.
But in our culture, when
we're doing that plus--
>>REGINA: Every day.
>>DOUILLARD: --all the processed
sugars, and all the refined--
when you go to a
health food store,
and you get these
boxes of crackers,
and it says "canola
oil" on it, that oil
has been processed to the
hilt. It's non-digestible.
When you walk down the aisle
in the grocery store, and all
those clear bottles
of oils that have
been denatured and deodorized--
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
Udo told me about that.
Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: That stuff
is just undigestible.
And what it does is it
layers into your liver.
And the sinusoid cells in your
liver become deeply congested.
And the bile moves all
through your liver,
trying to detoxify and
get rid of yucky stuff.
And if it gets congested,
it can't do that.
So it dumps the toxins
into your blood.
And your blood goes, OK, I
guess I'll get rid of these
fat-soluble chemicals--
>>REGINA: And you're talking
about trans-fatty acids here.
>>DOUILLARD: Right,
that's exactly right.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DOUILLARD: And it pushes
it into your fat cells
or even into your brain,
and that's an issue.
And trans fats
are another topic.
We think that they're all gone
because a couple years ago,
they changed the label, and
now all labels say zero.
>>REGINA: No.
>>DOUILLARD: Isn't
that amazing to you?
>>REGINA: Because as
long as those oils
have been heated over a certain
temperature and processed,
they all contain trans fats.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
>>REGINA: As you just
said, if it's clear,
if it's not something that has
been delicately pressed out
of the seed or nut and then
put into cold storage, intact,
it likely has trans fats in it.
>>DOUILLARD: What's
beautiful about trans fats--
we all know that they're bad
for us because they're man-made
fats--
but trans fats are
very interesting.
What happens is
that trans fats have
bonds that are on opposite sides
of this chain of fatty acids.
So it keeps it straight
like a toothpick, OK?
The natural fats have
bonds on the same side,
so it bends the fat.
So it keeps it bent.
So imagine taking a
bunch of toothpicks,
and bending them in
all different shapes,
and then throwing
them into a jar.
Or taking a bunch of
toothpicks, and then
throwing them into a
thing, and stacking them.
The trans fats stick together
because they're straight,
and they're flat, and they
clump, and they congest deep
in your liver.
And they compromise the
efficiency of your liver
to metabolize fats,
raise cholesterol,
and process blood sugar.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DOUILLARD: And the number one
reason for those morning blood
sugars to rise, which is really
critical, those first morning
blood sugars, is because
the liver is overshooting
the runway first thing in
the morning with sugar.
>>REGINA: And when
you're talking
about the fat component
of that story,
for years, butter was demonized.
And now butter has come
back, organic butters,
mostly raw butters, for example,
as something the body at least
recognizes versus
these processed canola
oils and other oils that
are sitting on the shelf.
And they can have a really
conscious label on it,
it doesn't mean they
don't have trans fats
and they haven't been processed.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
So when you really look at this
whole issue of prediabetes,
you're looking at sugars
blasting into your bloodstream
and driving into your liver.
And then you have
fats layering, year
after year, this little layer
of grease in your liver,
congesting your
liver to the point
where it becomes
basically non-functional.
So it really does boil
down to your liver.
And you gotta remember-- the
liver produces this bile,
and it shoots the bile
into your small intestine.
But before it gets to
the small intestine,
it actually connects
with your pancreas ducts,
which make your enzymes.
So if the liver has
become congested,
and the bile's become thick and
viscous, which is very common,
then the pancreatic
enzymes which digest
won't get there either.
So now we have to take
digestive enzymes.
And the reality is we
just have congested
liver, and congested bile
and pancreatic ducts,
that are easy to decongest.
Fenugreek tea, cinnamon,
many foods you can eat--
>>REGINA: That's what
I was going to ask you.
>>DOUILLARD: --are very good
to clean out these-- beets
are a phenomenal bile thinner.
Eat beets and beet creams
to clean out the liver,
and get that liver and those
pancreatic ducts really moving.
It's phenomenal for
you to get that.
But we don't eat a
lot of those foods,
so the liver just
gets more congested.
>>REGINA: But then
the liver cleanse.
There's that famous
liver cleanse where you
drink a cup of oil, basically.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Can you talk
about that a little bit?
Is that a fast way to do it?
It's revolting, but is
it a quick path there?
>>DOUILLARD: It's a really
powerful cleansing effect,
and it can be risky
for some people.
And I have a lot of cleanses
on my website for people
to get cleanses--
>>REGINA: Yes, I noticed that.
>>DOUILLARD: --and really
about detoxifying the body,
and making sure,
before you go and do
a cleanse, that you've made sure
the body is a good detoxifier.
Otherwise, you just pull
the yucky fat chemicals
out of the fat cells and move
them from one place to another.
It's really important
to reset digestion first
and then detoxify.
That cleanse is very aggressive.
And I only do it
under supervision.
I really just don't put it
out there for everybody to do.
I think it's risky.
But you can do something that
can actually flush and get
the bile moving.
You can take 1 to 2
tablespoons of olive oil
with 1 to 2 teaspoons of
lemon juice every night
for about a month, and that's
like taking your gall bladder
for a run.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>DOUILLARD: It's like
exercising your gall--
>>REGINA: A nice, gentle way.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
>>DOUILLARD: So it
forces it to contract,
squirts out a bunch of bile,
cleans out those ducks.
And you can have a
lot of beets, like one
or two beets during that
month, or one beet a day
would be great, lots of
greens and leafy greens
during that month,
and you're starting
to create a nice
program to decongest
that liver for yourself.
>>REGINA: Oh,
that's good to hear.
It doesn't have
to be so extreme.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah,
definitely not.
>>REGINA: OK, so speaking
of not being extreme,
let's now start taking
this overarching subject
of Ayurveda, and how the
body types are interfacing
with the subject of
blood sugar, and which
ones might be more
livery, or kidney-ey,
and might tend to become more
toxic in those given areas,
so we recognize
ourselves in that story.
>>DOUILLARD: Well, in Ayurveda,
there's three body types.
Remember, Ayurveda's
the science of life.
It's how to live in harmony
with these natural cycles.
So in the winter,
there's a season
that's cold and dry,
so there's people--
we all know them--
that are cold and dry,
and they're hypermetabolic.
We call them Vata body types.
>>REGINA: Would that be more
Scandinavian, in general?
>>DOUILLARD: Well,
not necessarily.
Because, usually,
what's interesting,
if you live in the
cold, your body
will antidote that tendency,
and become hot and fiery.
>>REGINA: Yet, you seem to see
a lot of tall, thin, almost
brittle-looking people from
the extreme northern climates.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah, it could be.
Nowadays, you can get
any body type anywhere.
>>REGINA: Yeah, that's true.
>>DOUILLARD: But the winter
body types, the Vata body types,
are usually thinner-framed,
they're lighter build,
they're quick-thinking,
fast, creative, artistic.
They think fast, forget fast.
Everything they
do is really fast.
And they're governed by air.
So the problem with
these Vata body types
is they are doing everything
so fast that they skip meals,
and they don't eat
properly, they don't
have a routine about them.
And they desperately
need a routine.
And that creates the
tendency for them
to have hypoglycemia because
they're constantly going up.
And they're very sensitive, so
they have a digestive system
that's not built for endurance.
They need food when they get it.
When they don't get it,
they crash and burn.
They become very
vulnerable to that.
The Pitta body type, which is
the fiery, competitive, driven,
change the world
kind of body type,
overheats, and is overly
competitive, and burns out.
That body type is the
one who is so involved
in pushing through their
day that they forget to eat.
And then when they
finally do eat,
they either gorge themselves.
Or along the way,
they're nibbling,
or eating candy or
Cokes, or just inhaling
high glycemic index foods.
And that just shoots their
blood sugar right out.
>>REGINA: They'll do that
more so than the Vata will?
>>DOUILLARD: They will do that
more so than the Vata will.
And one of the worst things that
we can do for our blood sugar--
and a lot of people do
this, and a lot of women
do this, because you're so
busy, working, and taking
care of the kids, and driving
here, and driving there,
that they don't eat.
They cook the food
for everybody else,
but they don't
eat it themselves,
and they go through the day
without eating any food.
That's the absolute
worst thing you
can do for your blood sugar.
Because what happens when your
blood sugar starts to crash,
your adrenals go,
hey, this lady's nuts,
store fat, craving some sugar.
And then they're nibbling
on jelly beans in their car,
or they're just nibbling
on little things.
>>REGINA: They eat at night
when everybody goes to bed.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
So then all of that food
at night just sits there,
and it's extremely hard
on the blood sugar.
So the Pitta body type,
the fiery body types, they
can definitely become diabetic
because they run the risk
of burning out and inflaming.
But it usually comes
from a lifestyle
of pushing really, really hard.
So you have to realize, again,
eat meals, relax, take time.
These are the types that
never stop and eat their food.
They inhale their
food, and they go.
And in Ayurveda, we always
talk about three things
that are important for eating--
how, when, and what you eat.
And the when we eat
is important-- meals
versus snacks.
The what we eat is important.
And America's all
about what to eat.
We have diets for every day
of the week for what to eat.
But reality is it's
more based on eating
what's in season, which
would be more appropriate.
But the most important one
of all is how you eat--
relaxing and taking time.
And nowadays, unless we have
a book, or a movie, or TV,
or a phone to read, or a
magazine to flip through,
we're not comfortable
eating our food.
So stopping, and relaxing,
and being settled
allows you to digest
in an efficient manner.
Probably the biggest piece
of the blood sugar puzzle
is stress.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DOUILLARD: And we live
in a stressed out world,
and we're feeding
ourselves with comfort,
stress-relieving foods.
And if we could just all go to
the beach, or go on vacation,
and just chill, the blood
sugar changes dramatically.
And then you have your
Kapha body type, which
is like the spring body type.
The Pitta types are the
fiery, summer types.
Then you have your
spring body types--
Earth and water, heavy,
easygoing, mellow.
They're hypometabolic.
So they don't have
a fast metabolism.
And in our culture,
with six meals a day,
lots of high
glycemic foods, they
don't have a fighting chance.
That hypometabolic body type,
that slow metabolic system,
is going to store fat, and gain
weight, and predispose them
to prediabetes and diabetes
for sure, as well as weight.
So they have to
move and exercise.
And we should probably talk
about the value of exercise
with blood sugar--
>>REGINA: Yes, we will.
>>DOUILLARD: --because
that's important as well.
But these body types definitely
all can succumb to diabetes,
and that's why we
have an epidemic.
It's everybody.
But we get there based on our
own individual predispositions.
>>REGINA: And each of those
body types, from the thimbleful
of understanding.
I really have about
Ayurveda, really
requires a different
kind of fuel as well.
A hypometabolism versus
a hypermetabolism
will be not only drawn to,
but require different types
of food, won't they?
So I would like to
go through this.
And aren't most of us
a combination of them?
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah, we are.
>>REGINA: We have a
dominant, but we'll
have a little bit of one,
or maybe both of the others.
>>DOUILLARD: It's true.
>>REGINA: OK, so let's
take a dominant Vata
type of personality.
What would a day of
eating look like for them?
The foods that would really
benefit their disposition,
their body type.
>>DOUILLARD: One of the
risks of a Vata body type
is they are very sensitive,
and they have super high radar,
so they feel everything.
So they tend to feel foods
that work or don't work.
And they have a very
sensitive system,
so they don't have a real
robust digestive system.
So they're the
first ones to have
issues with harder to digest
foods, like wheat and dairy,
or animal products.
So they're the first
ones to get rid of wheat,
and they get rid of
dairy, and they get rid
of animal products.
And they're the ones to
shift towards being more ve--
>>REGINA: Because they're
more hypersensitive.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah, so
they become vegetarians.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>DOUILLARD: And for
all good reasons.
I don't want to eat animals
and all these great reasons.
The problem is that those
are dense proteins that
stabilize blood sugar.
So if that Vata body
type became a vegetarian
because they didn't digest
those hard to digest foods well
because they were very
sensitive in their digestion,
and we didn't fix the reason,
and we just went to an easier
diet, they are the ones that
become lousy vegetarians.
And how you become
a lousy vegetarian?
Without good protein
or enough protein,
you start to crave sugar.
You start to crave sweets.
The next thing you
know, you're just
nibbling on carbs, or
sweets, or candies,
or you have dark
chocolate stuffed away
in your glove compartment
or in your closet.
If you've got a little stash of
dark chocolate in your house,
you've gotta think, is that
a blood sugar indicator?
It could very well be.
>>REGINA: What about
lusting after Jack
in the Box ads or something?
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: If they're
protein-deprived,
isn't that going to be
something that plays in?
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
In Ayurveda, it's
interesting, there
are six tastes-- sweet,
sour, salt, pungent, bitter,
and astringent.
And in America, we live
on sweet, sour, and salt.
And sweet, sour, and
salt are comfort foods.
They calm us down.
McDonald's-- he must've went
to India many years ago,
Ronald McDonald,
figured this out.
>>REGINA: Addictive stuff.
>>DOUILLARD: I'm going to
give them salty French fries.
I'm going to give
them sweet milkshakes.
I'm going to put pickles
on their burgers.
And that'll just
instantly calm them down.
And it does.
And they're all stressed
out, going so fast,
they're very aggravated,
Vata aggravated,
so we give it to them
fast, they eat it fast,
it instantly calms their Vata.
It doesn't digest well.
That's second.
We don't really talk about that.
And that creates heavy digestion
and bogs down the digestion,
but it does provide a
satiety of feeling satisfied,
and we crave that
in this country.
The other three tastes--
bitter, and pungent, and
astringent-- the greens,
and the spicy foods,
and those bitter roots
that just aren't in
our diet anymore,
those are the ones that
balance our blood sugar.
And that's what we need to eat.
>>REGINA: That, right there,
is probably the biggest piece.
>>DOUILLARD: So I'm a big fan,
when you look at your plate,
that 2/3 of the plate
should be green,
and 1/3 split between your
protein and your starch.
So when your mom fed you,
it was meat, and potatoes,
and a vegetable,
or rice, and beans,
and a vegetable, or chicken,
and rice, and a vegetable.
It was always balanced.
They probably didn't give
us enough of the greens,
and we didn't eat them anyway.
>>REGINA: They were canned.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DOUILLARD: But the
ideas were right.
The balance was there.
And we've thrown
that out the window.
And now, when you talk about
vegetables and the benefits
of vegetables, what
the vegetables do,
the green cellulose, the
fiber in the vegetables,
is they attach to
the bile in your gut,
and they escort
the bile, which is
carrying toxins, and
chemicals, and cholesterol,
into the toilet.
If you don't have enough greens
in your diet, 94% of that bile
gets reabsorbed
back to your liver.
And your liver goes,
are you kidding me?
I am so busy, I can't even be
thinking about redoing this.
I'm going to put it into the
circulation to the blood,
and now those cholesterols,
toxic chemicals,
are circulating in your
blood, damaging and irritating
your arteries, and
causing the predisposition
to heart disease.
So the vegetables are
what escort the toxins
into the toilet.
Not enough of those,
they go right back.
And that's just a
dangerous road or hull.
And so easy to do, really,
just by making sure you
get those greens.
>>REGINA: But what about people
who say, oh, I drink my green
smoothie in the morning, right?
My powdered greens.
How do powdered greens, micro
greens, and all that factor in?
Is it still missing
the component we need,
which is the fiber?
>>DOUILLARD: Right, exactly.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>DOUILLARD: We've extracted
all the micronutrients and maybe
the sugars, which have
issues, and I'm OK
having some of those juice
greens as part of a meal,
but not a meal.
We should chew our food.
Here in Colorado,
kids are actually
given chewing gum to
take standardized tests
because the chewing
affects brain chemistry,
and mental clarity, and focus.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>DOUILLARD: Absolutely.
Chewing-- you think about
if you were a gorilla,
and you ate half your body
weight in vegetables per day,
that's 100 pounds
of vegetables, it
would take all day to chew
it, and that's what they do.
And we have the identical
digestion as they do.
Identical.
The only animal we can
actually swap them out.
And even the best raw food, if
we eat 2 pounds of vegetables
per day, that's a huge amount.
We're not even eating
close to what they eat.
But those vegetables
require us to chew.
And it creates a whole shift
in our brain chemistry.
It prepares the
digestive system.
It provides the fiber to
escort the toxins out.
It's so critical.
I don't mind adding a
little juice or protein
powders to the mix, but
that should not be a meal.
>>REGINA: And we should
not rely on greens.
As you said earlier,
salad's not a meal either.
Again, it goes back
to this balance.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
>>REGINA: OK, now
let's talk about Pitta.
What does an ideal spectrum
of food look like for Pitta
compared to what we would
normally do as Pittas?
>>DOUILLARD: Well, the
Vatas will probably
need smaller meals because
they have a smaller digestion.
And they still need
three meals a day.
Sometimes, I'll
actually let them
have four meals to get
started, and then they
can work their blood
sugar to have three.
And remember, the big
piece of the puzzle
here is when you're going
from six meals a day
to three meals a day, it
has to be without strain.
Soon as you're
craving something,
your blood sugar is crashing.
So eat a snack, make
it a healthy snack.
But then tomorrow,
have a bigger lunch,
and see if you can make
the energy last a little
bit longer.
>>REGINA: Yeah, keep looking
to perfect that balance.
>>DOUILLARD: Work it.
Pitta types, they
have a big furnace,
and they need a lot of fuel.
So they're going to
need higher quantities.
You want to make
sure that they're not
eating a lot of spicy
food because that can
overheat them and inflame them.
And diabetes, or prediabetes,
is actually inflammation
of either the gut, the
liver, the pancreas,
one of those three, or
all three get inflamed.
And Pitta types, they
tend towards inflammation.
And so they have to make
sure they're eating good.
And of course, the
cooling foods are
going to be the greens
and the bitters.
The pungent foods, or--
I'm sorry-- the bitter foods,
and the astringent foods,
the greens, and the
vegetables, and the beans,
are very cooling for the body.
And of course, the Pitta types
who need big doses of sugar
into the brain right away,
they crave potatoes, and meats,
and burgers, and fries, and
that quick, high-carb injection
to the brain, which,
of course, gives them
the energy they need.
But it actually brews the
underlying inflammation
which we don't want to have.
>>REGINA: OK, Kapha.
>>DOUILLARD: Kapha types
are easygoing, mellow, slow
metabolic body types.
They really require
three tastes--
pungent, bitter, and astringent.
So they live in
a world, America,
that is a sweet,
sour, and salty world,
and they require pungent,
bitter, and astringent.
So they require
spicy food to burn up
the fat, astringent foods to
clean and detoxify, and bitter
foods to flush the
system with more
alkaline, lymphatic,
moving agents.
And we live in a world where
it's exactly the opposite.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Most of the people
I know who are Kapha
constitutions like ice cream--
>>DOUILLARD: Pizza.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Popcorn and pizza.
Right.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
So these are issues
we have to be careful.
>>REGINA: Yeah, so basically,
they're eating exactly
out of their type.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
And so what about breakfast?
Not everybody's thinking
in terms of rice,
and protein, and
greens for breakfast.
What do you have?
What would you
recommend for breakfast?
>>DOUILLARD: Well,
breakfast can vary.
It can be eggs, which are good.
>>REGINA: Is that
good for all types?
>>DOUILLARD: It can
be good for all types.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>DOUILLARD: I think that
based on the seasons,
you can make some adjustment,
but eggs are good.
A good piece of good,
sprouted-grain bread
can be good.
Ezekiel bread, something
like that's good.
That's for starch.
And now you need
your vegetables.
Well, now you can get
the kale, or the greens,
or the leafy baby greens
already pre-washed.
Just pull it out,
and you can have
that with a cup of herbal
tea with your breakfast,
and it's great.
You've got your greens.
And believe it or
not, you acquire
a taste for these things.
Because inside that
green stuff is sugar.
That's what's in there.
So when you chew it, you
actually acquire a taste.
You change your brain
chemistry to actually
be satisfied with something
green versus something
super sweet, like the
sugar in your coffee.
>>REGINA: So we
just have to change
this paradigm of thinking.
Vegetables are cool
in the morning.
It's fine.
>>DOUILLARD: They are.
They can be.
>>REGINA: The whole
thing, the leaves--
>>DOUILLARD: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Especially leaves.
>>DOUILLARD: Or like
celery and a nut butter.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: That's
green, and that's
another way of doing breakfast.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I love
that in the morning.
>>DOUILLARD: That's great.
Yep.
>>REGINA: Almond butter
and celery, love it.
>>DOUILLARD: Yep, perfect.
>>REGINA: OK, now
what about exercise?
And let's do this for--
however you choose
to break it-- well,
we only have about
5 minutes left,
so we want to talk about
exercise and then blood
monitoring.
So encapsulate exercise
for us, because I
know different
constitutions need
a different kind of exercise.
>>DOUILLARD: Everybody
needs a different exercise.
Vata types are hypermetabolic.
So that means fast moving,
thinking all the time,
90 miles an hour in their
brain, they need to slow down.
>>REGINA: Yoga?
>>DOUILLARD: So yoga.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: And hiking
is great for them.
Pitta types are fiery, and
aggressive, and competitive,
and driven, and they tend to
be very, very competitive,
so they need exercises
that are relaxing.
Yoga is good, but they also
need aerobic activity as well.
But something that's beautiful,
like skiing, where they're
actually in beautiful places.
>>REGINA: Dancing.
>>DOUILLARD: Dancing.
>>REGINA: Things that
you like doing anyway.
>>DOUILLARD: That
you love doing.
Things that they love to do.
>>REGINA: What about hiking?
>>DOUILLARD: Not
for winning, yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: Not just to win.
>>REGINA: Not just running.
>>DOUILLARD: Not another
competitive venture, right?
>>REGINA: OK.
>>DOUILLARD: And then Kapha
types, just give anything.
>>REGINA: Move.
>>DOUILLARD: Anything, yes.
Anything will take--
bike riding, running,
but they need to move
their body for sure.
Now blood sugar,
when the sugar goes
high in your blood,
the first system that
shut down the ability to suck it
up, the sugar, is your muscles.
So the muscles, they cause
the insulin resistance.
So we can use exercise to
actually reinstate sugar back
into those muscles,
and use your muscles
to be the big gas
guzzlers for that sugar
and take the stress off
the rest of your system.
It's a huge opportunity.
Most people don't do it.
Now if I asked you,
when was the last time
you ran as fast as you could?
What would you say?
>>REGINA: A couple
days ago, but that
was only because I had
to run because I was late
for something.
>>DOUILLARD: OK, good.
>>REGINA: But normally,
I don't run full speed.
I might jog a little,
but mostly walk.
>>DOUILLARD: Now if
you ask a 12-year-old,
hey, when was the
last time you ran?
>>REGINA: Every day.
I used to run every day.
I loved running.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
Exactly.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: So kids use their
fast-twitch muscle fibers
every day.
As we become adults, we
do yoga, we go hiking,
and we don't use our body
using the fast-twitch part.
>>REGINA: But we're afraid
we're going to strain something,
hurt ourselves, pull
a muscle, hamstring--
>>DOUILLARD: But there's
ways you can do it.
You can take two tuna
fish cans, and you
can go like this really fast.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>DOUILLARD: You can punch.
You can just step up and down
your stairs in your house
as fast as you could.
And when you use
fast-twitch fibers,
it takes all the sugar
out of your blood.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>DOUILLARD:
Slow-twitch fibers--
>>REGINA: Intervals.
That's where Mercola and
this whole interval thing
is really handy.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
So fast-twitch activation
pulls the sugar.
Slow, long duration
activities burn fat fast,
which burns sugar.
So you want to get that
sugar out of your blood.
And I have a workout on my
website called the "12 Minute
Workout."
It's 12 minutes.
>>REGINA: 12 minutes?
>>DOUILLARD: You leave the room.
You come back.
You're done.
Nobody even knows
you're finished.
>>REGINA: And I'm going to tell
them how to get to your site.
So we know we have to move.
OK.
>>DOUILLARD: Yes.
>>REGINA: Now what about
monitoring our blood sugar?
We only have a minute
or two left now.
>>DOUILLARD: I think
one of the best ways--
if you're not sure whether you
have high blood sugar or not,
and you have cravings
for sugar, you
know you have a little issue
there, go get a blood sugar
monitor at a pharmacy.
We sell them on my website.
They're really good ones, cheap.
But you can get it anywhere.
And you test your blood
sugar in the morning.
>>REGINA: Little prick on
your finger in the morning.
>>DOUILLARD: Little
prick on your fingers,
squeeze some blood out, and
you check in the morning.
If that number is
over 100, you're
knocking on the
door of prediabetes.
If that number is
between below 85,
you're actually healing
your arterial walls.
If that number is
over 85, you're
beginning to damage
your arteries.
If it's over 100, then
you have prediabetes,
we need to take
this more seriously.
So if your numbers
are between 70 and 85,
have a little dessert.
Enjoy life.
But make it healthy,
eat balanced meals.
Don't worry too much about this.
But if those numbers
are over 100 or 110,
we got to be on the straight
and narrow for a while.
And the good news is
it's all reversible.
>>REGINA: That's what
I was going to ask.
>>DOUILLARD: Prediabetes
is reversible,
but we need to take
responsibility for our health.
And I think one of the best
ways is to look at that number
every morning.
And you get super psyched.
When that number's a
little high in the morning,
you're like, OK, dang it,
no sugar for me today.
>>REGINA: I can do
something about that.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
But if you don't know,
you're, eh, whatever.
I'll have a little
of this sweet here.
>>REGINA: So in almost every
case, it is reversible.
Out of all of this,
that's the take-away.
>>DOUILLARD: That's
the best news ever.
>>REGINA: If we
take responsibility,
we can reverse
all of the damage.
>>DOUILLARD: That
and nut butter is
good are the two
best reports all day.
>>REGINA: All right, very good.
I hope this has been as
beneficial and educational
to you as it has been to me.
You can visit Dr. Douillard's
website at lifespa.com.
You can learn more
about prediabetes,
Ayurveda cleansing, and
many other health subjects.
It's a fabulous portal for
overall health information.
Again, lifespa.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaia TV.
[THEME MUSIC]